Routing Protocols 

 
  Forwarding and Routing are the two most important network-layer functions. Both of these terms are different, but are often used interchangeably. Forwarding refers to the router-local action of transferring the packet from an input link interface to the appropriate output link interface. On the other hand, routing refers to the network-wide process that determines end-to-end paths that packets take from source to destination. Forwarding moves the packet from input link to the appropriate output link using the forwarding tables and the information stocked in the packet, is purely local computation, must be very fast (executed for every packet). Routing makes sure that the next hop actually leads to the destination, takes global decision, has distributed computation and communication and can go slower (only important when topology changes). 

  Link-state Routing has two phases: reliable flooding (tell all routers what you know about your local topology: each router transmits a Link state Packet(LSP) on all links; a neighboring router forward out all links except incoming) and path calculation (Dijkstra’s algorithm; each router computers best path complete network).  The challenges are packet loss and out-of-order arrival, but there are some solutions for these ones: acknowledgments and retransmissions, sequence numbers and time-to-live for each packet. 

  All link-state routing protocols apply Dijkstra’s algorithm to calculate the best path route. The algorithm is commonly referred to as the shortest path first (SPF) algorithm. This algorithm uses accumulated costs along each path, from source to destination, to determine the total cost of a route. 

  Distance-Vector Routing assumes that each node constructs a one-dimensional array containing the "distances"(costs) to all other nodes and distributes that vector to its immediate neighbors. The starting assumption for distance-vector routing is that each node knows the cost of the link to each of its directly connected neighbors. A link that is down is assigned an infinite cost. 

  The Routing Information Protocol (RIP) is one of the oldest distance-vector routing protocols which employ the hop count as a routing metric. RIP prevents routing loops by implementing a limit on the number of hops allowed in a path from source to destination. The largest number of hops allowed for RIP is 15, which limits the size of networks that RIP can support. RIP implements the split horizon, route poisoning and hold-down mechanisms to prevent incorrect routing information from being propagated. In RIPv1 routers broadcast updates with their routing table every 30 seconds. In the early deployments, routing tables were small enough that the traffic was not significant. As networks grew in size, however, it became evident there could be a massive traffic burst every 30 seconds, even if the routers had been initialized at random times. 

  In most networking environments, RIP is not the preferred choice for routing as its time to converge and scalability are poor compared to EIGRP, OSPF, or IS-IS. However, it is easy to configure, because RIP does not require any parameters, unlike other protocols. RIP uses the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) as its transport protocol, and is assigned the reserved port number 520. 

  Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) is a routing protocol for Internet Protocol (IP) networks. It uses a link state routing (LSR) algorithm and falls into the group of interior gateway protocols (IGPs), operating within a single autonomous system (AS). It is defined as OSPF Version 2 in RFC 2328 (1998) for IPv4. The updates for IPv6 are specified as OSPF Version 3 in RFC 5340 (2008).[2] OSPF supports the Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) addressing model. OSPF is a widely used IGP in large enterprise networks. IS-IS, another LSR-based protocol, is more common in large service provider networks. 

  Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is a standardized exterior gateway protocol designed to exchange routing and reachability information among autonomous systems (AS) on the Internet. BGP is classified as a path-vector routing protocol, and it makes routing decisions based on paths, network policies, or rule-sets configured by a network administrator. BGP may be used for routing within an autonomous system. In this application it is referred to as Interior Border Gateway Protocol, Internal BGP, or iBGP. In contrast, the Internet application of the protocol may be referred to as Exterior Border Gateway Protocol, External BGP, or eBGP. 
